---
layout: post
title: "State of the industry: Hannover messe 2023"
category: twincat plc simatic
toc: true
---

In this post I summarize my thoughts after visiting the Hannover Messe in 2023. I focus on the developments in PLC software. I found that the industry focuses more on software and it's developing tools catered towards software developers.

_I wrote this article back in 2023, but I forgot to post it. Better late then never._

Before I start: where do you believe we are currently at on the industry x.0 scale?

1.0 steam
2.0 electrification
3.0 digitization
4.0 smart automation
5.0 human machine connectivity

## Historical context

Before going into detail what the current state is, I want to go into how we got here.

It started with the industrial revolution when we used steam to power machines. This was industry 1.0. Then we electrified things and called it industry 2.0.

Because everything was controlled electrically, relays could be used to implement some _logic control_ into the machine. That is, if a box of a height 1 arrives here, open activate this piston. If the height is larger activate a second piston. With this more complex processes could be controlled, but changes were cumbersome and the relay cabinet is big as you see in the image.

{% picture 2023-hannover/relay-room.jpg %}

Queue the digital revolution which brought us industry 3.0. By digitizing the logic, it was possible to create more complex logic and it could be changed easily. We now have _programmable logic control_ or PLC for short.

The PLC programming and the tooling was used by and made for hardware people. That is why there is ladder logic that is basically a relay schematic. There was never a real separation between hardware and software people like in general IT.

Until now.

## The rise of software people

Over the last few years I've noticed that more and more people with a traditional IT background, including me, are entering the field of industrial automation. These people are used to different tools. For example command line tools, files which are saved in plain text or reusing other peoples code.

For a long time these things either didn't or barely existed. However that is changing now. There are some new players and some old players learned some new tricks. I'll introduce the new ones first and then the old ones.

## New kids on the block

### [Controllino](https://www.controllino.com/)

Controllino made an Arduino based PLC. It's quite cheap, at €100-€300, but the functionality is also limited. Depending on the price, you get a number of digital and analog I/O. There are currently no options to extend it.

The most interesting part is the software. Because it is based on an Arduino, you can use all existing Arduino sketches. Furthermore, they have a Python integration as well, so that you can easily do non-time critical operations in Python.

It seems like a good platform to quickly prototype and test something. With the added benefit that more people are familiar with Arduino code as they are with the IEC based languages.

### [Revolution PI](https://revolutionpi.com/)

Another new contender, but this one is based on a Raspberry Pi. It's a little more powerful in case you need some more compute, plus you can add up to ten different terminals to the PLC. Next to digital and analog I/O, there are also profinet, profibus and ethernet terminals available. The prices are also a bit higher than the Arduino one.

The Pi PLC can be programmed with the traditional PLC languages, or with C and Python.

### [Software defined automation](https://www.softwaredefinedautomation.io/)

This company doesn't produce PLCs. but is a software as a service company (SaaS). They have a product to do PLCops: doing PLC management and code history of different vendors across different factories/machines.

I think it is interesting to see that there are software only companies moving into the PLC world.

## Old players

### [Simatic AX](https://www.dex.siemens.com/industrialsoftware/automation-software/simatic-ax-plore?viewState=DetailView&cartID=&portalUser=&store=&cclcl=en_GB&selected=industrialsoftware)

Siemens suprised me the most with their new Simatic AX framework. It's a completely new approach to program PLC's compared to their previous solution with TIA portal.

The editor is VScode based. All code is saved in plain text files, there is a command line interface available, a package manager, unit tests, an autoformatter and configuration is done in yml files!

Amazing!

All wishes that Jakob and Peter mentioned in their [TwinCAT 4 wish list](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dgEsib42WaA) are there. Plus more.

Currently Simatic AX is in limited beta and it can be used to write libraries that you can then import into TIA portal. It all sounds very promising and I think AX will quickly replace TIA portal.

### [ctrlX Automation](https://apps.boschrexroth.com/microsites/ctrlx-automation/en/)

Rexroth made a complete new PLC platform based on a real time version of Ubuntu. It even runs on other hardware as well, although you do not get hard real time behavior.

Although I haven't used it, the functionalities sound great. For example the PLC has a web server running on it. Therefore you can connect it to your PC and start configuring it directly, without installing any software in your computer.

Also you can write parts of your real time code in C and integrate that into your PLC code.

Finally, all PLC variables are exposed over a REST api. With that you can get read or write variables in your PLC from any programming language.

One great example of this is where they had a jupyter notebook and executed `axis.goto(1.1, 2.1, 3.5)` command one by one on demand. This functionality makes it really easy to play around with your actuators.

### [TwinCAT](https://www.beckhoff.com/en-en/products/automation/twincat/)

From Beckhoff I didn't see a lot of promising software developments. They did launch a ChatGPT API for TwinCAT. Quite ironic, since these models rely on open source data code. Something that is largely amiss for Structred Text. Although they seem to have retrained their model, possibly on their internal code base.

## Wrapping up

The mindset around PLC software development seems to be changing. Not only are the users changing, the suppliers are too. It's a good development that vendors are providing native interfaces or integrating general purpose languages like Python and C into their products. Furthermore, they are sharing more and more code on GitHub. Finally, it is good to see the Arduino and Raspberry Pi based products. These new players will bring new life and a different perspective into the field.

My estimate is that we are currently at **Industry 3.2**. But, with these great tools to look forward to, we can finally move towards the hyped Industry 4.0.
