---
layout: post
title: "How to connect to a Siemens PLC from TIA portal on VMWare"
category: siemens
toc: false
---

Connecting to a PLC from a virtual machine can be challenging. In this article I show a step-by-step guide how to connect to a Siemens Simatic PLC.  Although this process will probably be similar for other PLCs. I also show a few tips and tricks on how to debug the process.

1. Check if you can see the PLC if you connect the PLC to your computer. If you get a ping reply, that is a yes.
    -  `ping 192.168.0.1`
2. If you get a reply go to the next step. If not, fix the IP of the Ethernet port in the same range as the IP address of the PLC.
    1. Go to **Control Panel > Network and Internet > Network Connections**
    2. Right click the network adapter where the PLC is connected to and select **Properties**.
    3. Select **Internet protocol Version 4 (TCP/IPv4)**
    4. For IP address enter the same numbers as your PLC for the first three parts. For the last one give it a unique number. In this case not `.1`, to prevent IP conflicts on your network. For example I used `192.168.0.10`.
        {% picture 2023-tia-vm/ip_settings.png %}
3. Try to ping the PLC again. If that works, start the VM and try to ping the PLC from inside the VM.
    -  `ping 192.168.0.1`
4. If that also works, you can check to which port the PLC it is connected
    ```powershell
    > Test-NetConnection 192.168.0.1

    ComputerName           : 192.168.0.1
    RemoteAddress          : 192.168.0.1
    InterfaceAlias         : Ethernet0
    SourceAddress          : 192.168.11.128
    PingSucceeded          : True
    PingReplyDetails (RTT) : 1 ms
    ```
4. Check which network connection the port is using, by selecting **Properties** of Ethernet0 in **Control Panel > Network and Internet > Network Connections**.
    {% picture 2023-tia-vm/port_connection_sing.png %}
5. Open your TIA project. Select your PLC and go to **Online > Extended go online**.
    {% picture 2023-tia-vm/tia_go_online.png %}
6. Under **PG/PC interface** select he network connection you found at step 5 and click **start search**.
    {% picture 2023-tia-vm/tia_start_search.png %}
7. Select **GoOnline**.
